CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

## About This Repository

This repository contains MIXIN, an executable implementation of MixinCalculus using YAML syntax. The accompanying paper (`mixin-calculus/mixin-calculus.tex`) presents the theoretical foundations of MixinCalculus and targets the Onward! conference.

### Supplementary Material

This repository serves as one of two supplementary materials for the paper:

1. **This repository (MIXIN implementation)**: The core evaluator and test suite validate every construction described in the paper, including Church-encoded booleans and natural numbers, CPS-agnostic programs with escape and multi-exit continuations, the Expression Problem solution via free composition, and immutable trie operations with dynamic lookup and deletion.

2. **ratarmount PR**: A proof-of-concept implementation of mixin-based union file system composition, demonstrating that MixinCalculus patterns (late binding, dynamic dispatch, lexical scoping) emerge naturally in union mount systems. This is an open pull request at https://github.com/mxmlnkn/ratarmount/pull/163 and is not part of ratarmount's released versions.

Both supplementary materials are authored by the paper's author. Citations to them in the paper use the `\selfcite` command, which hides the citation (and its identifying URL) under anonymous review and shows it in non-anonymous mode (e.g., arXiv preprint). The corresponding bib entries are `mixin2025` (this repository) and `ratarmount2025` (the ratarmount PR).

## Prerequisites

- [Nix](https://nixos.org/) with flakes enabled
- [direnv](https://direnv.net/) (recommended)

## Development Environment

This project uses Nix flakes to manage dependencies. After modifying any `.nix` file (e.g., `modules/texlive.nix`), the current shell environment becomes stale. You must use `direnv exec .` to run commands with the updated environment:

```sh
direnv exec . latexmk -pdf -interaction=nonstopmode mixin-calculus/mixin-calculus.tex
```

Alternatively, restart your shell or run `direnv reload` to pick up the changes.

## Building the Paper

```sh
cd mixin-calculus
latexmk -pdf -interaction=nonstopmode mixin-calculus.tex
```

## Adding Test Files

When adding new test files (e.g., `tests/src/my_test.mixin.yaml`), you **must** use `git add` before Nix can see them:

```sh
git add tests/src/my_test.mixin.yaml
direnv exec . nix run .#update-tests-snapshot
```

Nix uses Git to track files in the repository. Untracked files are invisible to Nix commands.

### Debugging Test Failures

If you encounter errors when updating tests, use `--show-trace` to see the full stack trace:

```sh
nix run .#update-tests-snapshot --show-trace
```

Common issues:
- **Stack overflow**: Check for infinite recursion in self-references
- **YAML parsing errors**: Avoid using `====` or similar decorative comment lines (they may be misinterpreted as file paths)
- **Missing properties**: Ensure all referenced fields exist in composed mixins

To test a single file without updating the full snapshot:

```sh
nix eval --impure --show-trace --expr '
let
  lib = (builtins.getFlake "git+file://'$(pwd)'").lib;
  yaml = (builtins.getFlake "git+file://'$(pwd)'").inputs.yaml.lib.fromYaml;
  ast = yaml (builtins.readFile ./tests/src/my_test.mixin.yaml);
in
  builtins.attrNames ast
'
```

## Adding TeXLive Packages

TeXLive packages are declared in `modules/texlive.nix`. Note that package names in nixpkgs may differ from CTAN names (e.g., `zi4` is `inconsolata`, `newtxmath` is `newtx`).

## Naming Conventions

- **Do not use single-letter variable names.** Use descriptive names that convey the purpose of the variable.
- **Do not use abbreviated or truncated English words** (e.g., `expr` for `expression`, `env` for `environment`, `val` for `value`). Write out the full word. The fact that an abbreviation is widely used in the industry does not justify its use here.
- **Exception:** established notations that are part of a fixed formal system are permitted, but these are limited to very few cases (e.g., `T` for a type variable in a typing judgment, `Γ` for a typing context). When in doubt, spell it out.

### MIXIN File Naming Conventions

In `.mixin.yaml` files, the following naming conventions apply:

| Concept | Case | Examples |
|---------|------|----------|
| Module / namespace | `snake_case` | `boolean`, `nat`, `arithmetic`, `algorithms` |
| Type / class / trait | `PascalCase` | `Boolean`, `Nat`, `BinNat`, `Semigroup` |
| Constructor / value | `PascalCase` | `True`, `False`, `Zero`, `Succ`, `ListNil` |
| Method / function (verb) | `snake_case` | `and`, `add`, `equalize` |
| Implementation binding | `PascalCase` | `NatAddSemigroup`, `BooleanOrSemigroup` |
| Data field / parameter | `snake_case` | `element_type`, `left`, `right`, `on_true` |
| Temporary variable | `_snake_case` | `_applied_addend`, `_applied_augend`, `_applied_left` |

**Free functions vs. methods**: Prefer free functions over methods. A free function is defined at the module level, takes its arguments explicitly, and does not rely on dynamic dispatch through `self`. Use methods only when subtypes need to provide different implementations (i.e., when dynamic dispatch is required). For example, `is_zero` is a method on `Nat` because `Zero` and `Succ` implement it differently, but `add` should be a free function because its logic is uniform and does not vary by subtype.

**Method / function `return` requirement**: Every method and function must have exactly one `return` member that holds its result. If a computation produces multiple named outputs, it is not a function — it is a type (class/trait) and must use `PascalCase`:

```yaml
# CORRECT: a function with a single return
nat_add:
  - [types, Nat]
  - augend:
      - [types, Nat]
    addend:
      - [types, Nat]
    return:
      # ... computes the sum

# CORRECT: multiple named outputs → this is a type, not a function
DivisionResult:
  - quotient:
      - [types, Nat]
    remainder:
      - [types, Nat]

# WRONG: a function without return
nat_add:
  - [types, Nat]
  - result:       # should be "return", not "result"
      # ...
```

### Module Design Philosophy

Each module should be understood as a **category** (in the sense of abstract algebra and category theory). A module defines a collection of types, constructors, and operations that form a coherent algebraic structure (e.g., a group, monoid, or semiring).

**Abstract dependencies**: When a module depends on another module's interface, it must declare that dependency **abstractly** — depending on the interface (types and operation signatures), not on a specific implementation. For example, `nat` depends on the interface of `boolean` (the type `Boolean` with `True` and `False` constructors), but it does not depend on how `boolean` is implemented:

```yaml
# nat module: depends on boolean's INTERFACE, not its implementation
nat:
  - [boolean]       # ← declares dependency on boolean's abstract interface
  - Nat:
      is_zero:
        return: {}  # ← returns a Boolean, but nat doesn't define Boolean
      # ...
```

This separation ensures that:
- Modules can be composed freely: any conforming implementation of `boolean` can be substituted.
- The dependency graph is explicit: each module's mixin list declares exactly which abstract interfaces it requires.
- Modules remain testable in isolation: mock implementations of dependencies can be provided.

**Qualified `this`** is a reference of the form `[MixinName, [property, path]]` where `MixinName` is the name of an enclosing mixin resolved via `selfName`. It resolves through dynamic `self`, meaning the path is navigated on the fully composed evaluation — not just the mixin's own definition. The mixin name in a qualified `this` must be `PascalCase` to avoid name shadowing:

```yaml
# [NatAdd, [addend]] is a qualified this — NatAdd refers to the mixin being defined
# [NatAdd, [successor]] is also qualified this — successor is inherited from Nat
NatAdd:
  - [types, Nat]
  - augend:
      - [types, Nat]
    addend:
      - [types, Nat]
    _applied_addend:                   # Temporary variable (not qualified this)
      - [NatAdd, [addend]]            # ← Qualified this: NatAdd.self.addend
      - successor:
          - [NatAdd, [successor]]     # ← Qualified this: NatAdd.self.successor
    result:
      - [_applied_addend, result]     # ← Just a variable reference, not qualified this

# WRONG: lowercase mixin name — prone to shadowing
nat_add:
  - [types, Nat]
  - result:
      - [nat_add, [addend]]   # "nat_add" can be shadowed by a property named "nat_add"
```

The risk: if any ancestor in the scope chain has a property matching the lowercase name (e.g., `result`, `argument`, `nat_add`), the reference resolves to the wrong binding. PascalCase names like `NatAdd` are distinctive enough to avoid accidental collisions with `snake_case` data fields.

**When to use qualified this vs. direct references**:
- Use `[property]` or `[property, subproperty]` when the first segment is accessible in the current lexical scope.
- Use `[MixinName, [property, path]]` when the property is only accessible through the dynamic `self` of an enclosing mixin (e.g., inherited properties that are shadowed in the current scope).
- For module-level references within the same module, prefer dropping the module prefix: `[types, Nat]` instead of `[stdlib, [types, Nat]]`.

Commit message:

feat: update qualified this syntax to use null delimiter and deprecate old syntax across multiple files

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

## About This Repository

This repository contains MIXIN, an executable implementation of MixinCalculus using YAML syntax. The accompanying paper (`mixin-calculus/mixin-calculus.tex`) presents the theoretical foundations of MixinCalculus and targets the Onward! conference.

### Supplementary Material

This repository serves as one of two supplementary materials for the paper:

1. **This repository (MIXIN implementation)**: The core evaluator and test suite validate every construction described in the paper, including Church-encoded booleans and natural numbers, CPS-agnostic programs with escape and multi-exit continuations, the Expression Problem solution via free composition, and immutable trie operations with dynamic lookup and deletion.

2. **ratarmount PR**: A proof-of-concept implementation of mixin-based union file system composition, demonstrating that MixinCalculus patterns (late binding, dynamic dispatch, lexical scoping) emerge naturally in union mount systems. This is an open pull request at https://github.com/mxmlnkn/ratarmount/pull/163 and is not part of ratarmount's released versions.

Both supplementary materials are authored by the paper's author. Citations to them in the paper use the `\selfcite` command, which hides the citation (and its identifying URL) under anonymous review and shows it in non-anonymous mode (e.g., arXiv preprint). The corresponding bib entries are `mixin2025` (this repository) and `ratarmount2025` (the ratarmount PR).

## Prerequisites

- [Nix](https://nixos.org/) with flakes enabled
- [direnv](https://direnv.net/) (recommended)

## Development Environment

This project uses Nix flakes to manage dependencies. After modifying any `.nix` file (e.g., `modules/texlive.nix`), the current shell environment becomes stale. You must use `direnv exec .` to run commands with the updated environment:

```sh
direnv exec . latexmk -pdf -interaction=nonstopmode mixin-calculus/mixin-calculus.tex
```

Alternatively, restart your shell or run `direnv reload` to pick up the changes.

## Building the Paper

```sh
cd mixin-calculus
latexmk -pdf -interaction=nonstopmode mixin-calculus.tex
```

## Adding Test Files

When adding new test files (e.g., `tests/src/my_test.mixin.yaml`), you **must** use `git add` before Nix can see them:

```sh
git add tests/src/my_test.mixin.yaml
direnv exec . nix run .#update-tests-snapshot
```

Nix uses Git to track files in the repository. Untracked files are invisible to Nix commands.

### Debugging Test Failures

If you encounter errors when updating tests, use `--show-trace` to see the full stack trace:

```sh
nix run .#update-tests-snapshot --show-trace
```

Common issues:
- **Stack overflow**: Check for infinite recursion in self-references
- **YAML parsing errors**: Avoid using `====` or similar decorative comment lines (they may be misinterpreted as file paths)
- **Missing properties**: Ensure all referenced fields exist in composed mixins

To test a single file without updating the full snapshot:

```sh
nix eval --impure --show-trace --expr '
let
  lib = (builtins.getFlake "git+file://'$(pwd)'").lib;
  yaml = (builtins.getFlake "git+file://'$(pwd)'").inputs.yaml.lib.fromYaml;
  ast = yaml (builtins.readFile ./tests/src/my_test.mixin.yaml);
in
  builtins.attrNames ast
'
```

## Adding TeXLive Packages

TeXLive packages are declared in `modules/texlive.nix`. Note that package names in nixpkgs may differ from CTAN names (e.g., `zi4` is `inconsolata`, `newtxmath` is `newtx`).

## Naming Conventions

- **Do not use single-letter variable names.** Use descriptive names that convey the purpose of the variable.
- **Do not use abbreviated or truncated English words** (e.g., `expr` for `expression`, `env` for `environment`, `val` for `value`). Write out the full word. The fact that an abbreviation is widely used in the industry does not justify its use here.
- **Exception:** established notations that are part of a fixed formal system are permitted, but these are limited to very few cases (e.g., `T` for a type variable in a typing judgment, `Γ` for a typing context). When in doubt, spell it out.

### MIXIN File Naming Conventions

In `.mixin.yaml` files, the following naming conventions apply:

| Concept | Case | Examples |
|---------|------|----------|
| Module / namespace | `snake_case` | `boolean`, `nat`, `arithmetic`, `algorithms` |
| Type / class / trait | `PascalCase` | `Boolean`, `Nat`, `BinNat`, `Semigroup` |
| Constructor / value | `PascalCase` | `True`, `False`, `Zero`, `Succ`, `ListNil` |
| Method / function (verb) | `snake_case` | `and`, `add`, `equalize` |
| Implementation binding | `PascalCase` | `NatAddSemigroup`, `BooleanOrSemigroup` |
| Data field / parameter | `snake_case` | `element_type`, `left`, `right`, `on_true` |
| Temporary variable | `_snake_case` | `_applied_addend`, `_applied_augend`, `_applied_left` |

**Free functions vs. methods**: Prefer free functions over methods. A free function is defined at the module level, takes its arguments explicitly, and does not rely on dynamic dispatch through `self`. Use methods only when subtypes need to provide different implementations (i.e., when dynamic dispatch is required). For example, `is_zero` is a method on `Nat` because `Zero` and `Succ` implement it differently, but `add` should be a free function because its logic is uniform and does not vary by subtype.

**Method / function `return` requirement**: Every method and function must have exactly one `return` member that holds its result. If a computation produces multiple named outputs, it is not a function — it is a type (class/trait) and must use `PascalCase`:

```yaml
# CORRECT: a function with a single return
nat_add:
  - [types, Nat]
  - augend:
      - [types, Nat]
    addend:
      - [types, Nat]
    return:
      # ... computes the sum

# CORRECT: multiple named outputs → this is a type, not a function
DivisionResult:
  - quotient:
      - [types, Nat]
    remainder:
      - [types, Nat]

# WRONG: a function without return
nat_add:
  - [types, Nat]
  - result:       # should be "return", not "result"
      # ...
```

### Module Design Philosophy

Each module should be understood as a **category** (in the sense of abstract algebra and category theory). A module defines a collection of types, constructors, and operations that form a coherent algebraic structure (e.g., a group, monoid, or semiring).

**Abstract dependencies**: When a module depends on another module's interface, it must declare that dependency **abstractly** — depending on the interface (types and operation signatures), not on a specific implementation. For example, `nat` depends on the interface of `boolean` (the type `Boolean` with `True` and `False` constructors), but it does not depend on how `boolean` is implemented:

```yaml
# nat module: depends on boolean's INTERFACE, not its implementation
nat:
  - [boolean]       # ← declares dependency on boolean's abstract interface
  - Nat:
      is_zero:
        return: {}  # ← returns a Boolean, but nat doesn't define Boolean
      # ...
```

This separation ensures that:
- Modules can be composed freely: any conforming implementation of `boolean` can be substituted.
- The dependency graph is explicit: each module's mixin list declares exactly which abstract interfaces it requires.
- Modules remain testable in isolation: mock implementations of dependencies can be provided.

**Qualified `this`** is a reference that resolves through the dynamic `self` of an enclosing mixin (identified by `selfName`), navigating the fully composed evaluation — not just the mixin's own definition. The syntax is:

```
[SelfName, ~, path, segments...]
```

In YAML, `~` is `null`. In JSON, write `null`. This is analogous to Java's `Outer.this.path.segments`.

```yaml
# [Add, ~, addend] is a qualified this — Add refers to the enclosing mixin
# [Add, ~, successor] is also qualified this — successor is inherited from Nat
Add:
  - [types, Nat]
  - augend:
      - [types, Nat]
    addend:
      - [types, Nat]
    _applied_addend:                   # Temporary variable (not qualified this)
      - [Add, ~, addend]              # ← Qualified this: Add.self.addend
      - successor:
          - [Add, ~, successor]       # ← Qualified this: Add.self.successor
    return:
      - [_applied_addend, return]     # ← Just a variable reference, not qualified this
```

The old syntax `[SelfName, [path, segments]]` is **deprecated** and emits a warning. Convert all occurrences to the `~` syntax.

**When to use qualified this vs. direct references**:
- Use `[property]` or `[property, subproperty]` when the first segment is accessible in the current lexical scope.
- Use `[SelfName, ~, property, path]` when the property is only accessible through the dynamic `self` of an enclosing mixin (e.g., inherited properties that are shadowed in the current scope).
- For module-level references within the same module, prefer dropping the module prefix: `[types, Nat]` instead of `[stdlib, ~, types, Nat]`.
